You can see the word.
And if you want me to shut it up, tell me shut it up.
No, the thing is what I would like, I would appreciate, though.
I know this is very difficult to ask it when you've got so many people you're doing.
I would like to see what you've heard of me before you do it.
If you make me that deal, I'll talk to this man.
I will show you any quote that I attribute to you that comes from you.
I will go over and I will read to you on the phone.
I won't give you a copy of the chapter or the book, but anything that you'd like.
Okay, fine.
Well, the simplest distinction, the sort of thing that you set out a copy of the book and somebody says, all right, you're dealing with rare books, what are they?
You say, well, you could say.
A rare book is a book that costs money.
Now, it can cost money for several reasons.
It can cost money because it's actually literally rare.
There are very few copies of it now.
It can cost money because it's beautiful.
It can cost money because it's important.
All of those are possible orders, but rarely is probably the least of the ordinary things.
People have said this over and over again.
The real value of books tends to be important as far as eating a piece that is in descending order.
And rarity, perhaps, the least of them, because you can find books of which no other copy is known that you wouldn't give shelf space to.
But what is the guiding principle to the bookseller?
Well, we don't have books here that cost less than $50 or $100.
So I suppose the criterion is price.
I mean, that's from a rare bookseller's point.
point of view.
We're not snobs about age.
If we get a book printed yesterday, it costs a great deal of money.
We don't handle it if we like the book for other reasons.
So really, what you are talking about in retail, and this is worldwide, is a system that you set up for, you know, some people are set up to sell objects for a buck of things.
We're not set up for that.
If we sell a book for a buck, we'd probably lose for $40 and then add more.
Which books, it does seem to go beyond that book.
It does seem to be something.
Oh, sure.
I mean, a spirit.
When you reduce it to value, it's paper and boards.
If you were to love this.
Well, yes.
That value is going to be negligible.
Sure, but I'm answering your question, why do people speak of rare books?
Well, really, most of them are talking about.
How would you distinguish that from an antiquarian book?
Well, many antiquarian books are inexpensive and rare book-sized.
An antiquarian book is just a book that you can't buy at a new bookshop.
An old book, I guess.
We obviously have strong feelings about areas of stock and areas that we sell.
For example, I'll give you a fairly good example.
You can buy 18th century novels in 18th century editions fairly easily, and they are common enough.
on the whole, even the first editions of the famous ones like Fielding's novels or Richardson's novels.
They're common enough that you could probably, if you're a collector, pick and choose a non-profit.
Now, we would, on the whole, not pursue copies of 18th-century novels in modern bundles because the best condition for it
a book of this sort is felt, and we feel easily with it, to be contemporary.
So, we are likely to form a kind of a stock around the best we can do with a book.
Now, if we made the same condition for 17th century plays, or Shakespeare folios, we'd be, simply we wouldn't be operating in a modern market role.
So our distinction, our conditions of the copies that we like to have, that we seek out, will tend to reflect availability.
Now, I know this is not really answering the simple question of what a rare book is, but it rather depends on how rare the book is, what a rare book is.
For example, Trilby, as an author,
Trophy with Spendali, Gamori's Trophy is a novel that's pretty damn common and just in different conditions.
And I would say, actually, if I saw an ordinary copy of it, I wouldn't even blink.
I wouldn't say, let's have it, let's offer it, let's deal with it.
But if I saw an absolutely beautiful copy, I would.
I have one in Stockholm, but I wouldn't have one that was banged up.
Whereas if I saw a banged up copy of
second folio, and I'll probably take it seriously.
You buy for quality, of course, and sell.
You are among the very few booksellers, I would imagine, that continue to buy for stock, buy rarity for stock, general stock.
There aren't many left to do that, I don't think.
Well, I think most people, I mean, at your level?
Well, no, no.
We probably are.
I don't know.
You will know the world market better than me.
But I would have thought we're probably just about the largest in terms of cash.
So then, the question here develops from that.
You basically determine rarity then, don't you?
If you go to an auction, you go for sale.
willing to send for an item.
I don't know what you think it's worth.
Well, when you say determine, I would say decide upon.
Yeah, okay.
We don't define it.
How would you distinguish between the two, then?
Very simply.
I mean, we make our own decisions.
That doesn't actually determine the case.
We could, for example, decide if it was worth X and it could go for 3X.
What's true?
Our appraisal are the market prices.
Yeah, but I mean,
When you're in the heat of battle, so to speak, and you've decided on X, is that as far as you go, or are you willing to go to 3X on it?
A 2.5.
You can have a bit of a 2.5.
If I said we decided on X, then I would go to 3X on it.
In the heat of battle, I wouldn't sound too good with that.
Interesting.
Auctions are, as you know.
Well, I've quoted you in my situation.
I asked you, how is it that Cervantes went for $1.65 million when everybody said it was going to go for $250,000?
You said two people wanted it very badly, and only one of them could get it.
That's true.
That's what makes it.
That's the other bit of principle, I guess.
But then again, if that same book were to go on three or four months later, who knows?
That's right.
We'll look up the Shakespeare full wheel.
and the guidance.
Yes, they lingered.
They've wandered, too, since then.
Yeah.
Well, they're in one hand now, but at least the first.
Well, I guess all.
But they were purchased for measurably less than they went for.
Yes, that's true.
In fact, I think they changed hands for less than I even did.
But then again, what did people bid when they went up again at the many sales?
I think David bought the men at 1.5, but nobody could see anybody doing it after $600,000 or $700,000.
That's not quite true.
I think I don't remember.
Did you remember?
No, I think that's all.
I'm not sure it would have been the smartest purchase.
With things which are extremely visible in the auction market,
The dealer's dilemma is that he has to be willing to buy something for a lot of money if it costs that, and to hold it until someone wishes to buy it.
And since the cost is a matter of extremely open record, and in some cases another copy or something similar could come along,
almost at once, this can be a serious gap, especially for people without a lot of sort of un-encompassing capital to play with.
Now, I'm not asking you about any particular sale.
I mean, you mentioned Shakespeare, you mentioned that he'd been a millionaire.
I don't think so, I can't.
I believe, I'm not... Either in the garden or... Yeah, whatever.
But were you doing that with a specific client in mind, or were you doing that with...
You have the authorization of the firm that's a million dollars without knowingly having a particular... I think in one of those two sales, that's true.
So there's a meeting and they say, fine, if we can get it for a million, we'll go a million.
And does that generally happen when you go to these sales?
You kind of have a mandate of... Well, I don't think I want to talk about the internal decision-making here, but
Yes, in general, we're not a bunch of loose counts.
We don't go off and have bills that could bankrupt.
But we do consult and discuss everything.
It is a matter of just deciding whether you're willing to, whether you think it's wise, to hold stock of a certain period of time.
as time goes, but it can be very possible.
As a major figure here, Clark, arguably the most prestigious bookseller in the world, I mean, it was a good general softball, not a hardball.
Signed by the Splinter.
Is that right?
I envy you.
Present from Maureen Island.
Anyway, how would you judge the state of the real book world as we approach the year 2000?
Is the interest still as strong in books?
Are the collectors there?
Do you find that you're dealing with an older, like the owners of Cadillacs now have it.
No, actually, the curious thing is I don't think that's so.
I think the world isn't quite as... the world of collectors isn't quite, perhaps, as guild-edged as it once was.
I mean, there are lots of collectors, but many of the most powerful ones these days are not old-timers at all, but the only one they have yet to make there.
You have to make their mark, and whether they will stay in it a long time, one doesn't know.
That's one of the great problems of collecting in general, is that if you're really committed to this field at a fairly high level, you've got to collect for a long time before you make the kind of dent in the history of book collecting that your predecessors did.
But don't forget that famous collectors like Claussen,
a Buffalo collector.
Have you written a lot of him?
I haven't written a lot of him.
Well, you don't lie to me.
Closon was only in business, I'm not sure of this, but only about 10 years.
That whole thing, he was a Rosenbach customer who was for a while a favorite song.
He built and built and built great stuff.
An enormous catalog, great sale.
And you think, you know, how long could my guy have been doing it?
A very short time.
And we have these comers and goers.
We'll talk of, even though Moore was not a long-term collector.
Well, Dick Matty's a different story, because he's really still a collector, and we wouldn't want him to find anything.
He's trying to get the same collection back.
That's right.
He said, this time I'm going to be much more focused.
And I said, what are you going to be focused on, Dick?
And he said, well, no, I'm trying to buy back the books I have.
But, for example, Bradley Martin, who was a lifetime collector, and while he had enthusiasms in various directions, like French books, bird books, English letters, I mean, these all reflect
Almost all, some of them were relatively new fields.
They almost always reflect a very long time going.
Now, a specialist collector, if he gets lucky or something, he comes along at the right moment that you wanted to collect trolley, and you came along at the time of the Yardley sales, and you could have, for a certain amount of money, painful as it might have seemed, you could have had the greatest trolley collection in the world, and kept at him.
and had it in one or two days, he couldn't.
But on the whole, that isn't the way things work.
I mean, a young person starts out and thinks, I want to collect Dickens.
Well, he's looking over his shoulder at guys who have huge or impressive collections, everything in presentation form, they have letters, they have this, they have that.
All he can do is
fight for what comes up now.
And maybe he will take something away.
It may be very costly, and the nice new book is offered for the first time.
The collection breaks up.
If he's young, he has hopes.
There are many fields which have been so dominated by collectors in the past that it's amazing to me that people get into them, and yet they do, like Samuel Johnson.
You said that there are collectors who want local records, so to speak.
Do you actually find people who want to be regarded or make a dent in the history books?
Oh, I don't know.
Wouldn't you?
You'd sort of feel, you know, I'd like to be... I mean, it's not that I just want a handful of things on the shelves.
I'd like my collection to be somehow different from anyone else's.
You said, so therefore, that it's not a gilded group.
You do see some younger...
younger people like, you know, my age, younger than that.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, there are people coming along all the time.
And we learn about them.
They sometimes come to us.
Many times they collect for a bit before they come to us.
But, yeah, in all countries, Europe especially.
Do you find that they're collecting for pleasure or investment?
That's always been an extremely difficult line to discuss.
I mean, the problem is that almost anyone collecting with a substantial part of his own income is looking at his collection in terms of its ultimate value, its resale.
Even if you never intend to sell a book,
It's hard not to look at the assets as they pile up on the shelf and think, what's smart to buy?
On the whole, people who stress investment over individual preference, I think, do worse.
They don't get the votes that they really ought to have because they think, is that really worth it?
They make their decision with their pocketbook rather than their heart, and it can lead to a collection which has all about the things that you really think the guy should have.
But that's an easy thing to say.
Remember also, if you set yourself a program, you say, I want to collect Victorian fiction, like Robert Lee Wolf did, with a
a good income, but not, he wasn't a really wealthy man.
I mean, Robert Lee Wolf built up this enormous collection of Victorian novels that's now at Texas after his death.
All his youth, he deliberately avoided Dickens, Thackeray, Trollope, Thomas Hardy.
He just said, you know, these are too expensive.
I could spend all the money I have buying these, so let me buy the ones that I won't see again.
Let me buy the minor stuff.
And by the end of his life, he actually had enough extra, and he had all this huge quantity of stuff, that he was able then to turn to the high spots.
And you could argue that he never got the kind of high spotty books that he would have if he'd been looking for them all along.
But that was his way of making, of taking an amount of money he had to spend.
But he did collect the minor writers, which is interesting in its own way, isn't it?
Oh, yes.
Well, I mean, he built a stunning collection, I agree.
More minor than Sally would have touched.
And as a result, he gave himself a terrific perspective on what was out there.
Because he knew so much more about people that we all thought were just a mother-in-law.
We used to go back to a crazy distance
You mean by that the collection almost cries out to have certain books that they... Well, suppose again, I'll tell you a personal attitude.
I started out in life wanting to collect books about Tahiti.
I have roughly, I don't know, I suppose at the outset, outside I have maybe $500 a year
That wouldn't get you very far.
But I was very assiduous.
I really did want the stuff about Tahiti.
And somewhere about the second year I was doing this, I think 1961, the original journals of Captain Wallace's voyage to Tahiti, the English discovery, along with lots of washed drawings of Tahiti, came up at auction.
They didn't fetch that much.
taking a deep breath.
I could have bought one.
But I couldn't.
I couldn't possibly.
And I knew that from then on that I would always have lived through the sale of the absolute cornerstone of what I wanted to be, my collection.
And I couldn't even compete for it.
So I gave up collecting to E.D.
And I think that's the problem.
You couldn't get that.
Well, I mean, I just thought, how silly.
I mean, I could follow
Do you collect that?
Oh, I do.
What do you collect?
Well, I collect in many directions.
My wife and I are very serious about scholars of the 19th century and the 18th century, literary scholars and also book collectors and bibliographers.
We have a lot of association material, this sort of thing, and we also collect a lot of curious
of separate directions along, trying to stay on a direct competition.
Do you collect synergistically, so to speak, or do you collect independently?
No, together.
I don't take up too much of your family.
Do you advise people?
Do you act like a financial advisor?
I mean, do you act like an investment?
but we had a lot of collectibles and then looking for guidance.
Do you work at it and say... Sure.
I mean, when asked.
I mean, some people really resent this and some people really want it.
I mean, you know, we do.
A straight question will get a straight answer.
Of course, we, like any sane
member of a Beeland community, we wouldn't, if all you want to ask is whether you should buy this book for that much from somebody else, we're not going to trash it or endorse it, although we probably will answer.
But yes, many people do come to us asking for general advice.
It's surprising, even if you're a real expert, it's surprising how much a bookseller might actually know that you can't believe you didn't know.
That is an aspect that I'm trying to explore.
Do you find that booksellers today are scholars about it?
Well, scholars in the formal sense, and some are, some write.
I mean, and yourself, we should point out, you have a number of
advanced degrees that you taught, as a matter of fact, didn't you?
Did you teach at Harvard?
No, I was a professor.
Yes, I've written ten books.
Fifty or sixty articles.
That's right, so you have a scholarly... Yeah, but on the whole, the scholarship of a bookseller is in his simple knowledge of stuff.
If I want to know something obscure about a certain author or book, I can often call somebody who never made it out of high school and who will be able to read me lessons in that.
It is astonishing where you find information.
It's a small world, but it's very, very tightly connected.
The lines are very clear.
I mean, I have a letter on my desk from somebody who's finished up a bibliography of Thomas Froden of Dupin.
And I guess it's she, I don't know, Karma Pippen.
Isn't that a California name beyond description?
It just arrived yesterday.
And she's writing, asking for help getting into the Rylands Library, which I can't give her.
But on the other hand, what she's going to get when I do write back is...
the location of half a dozen dedication copies of Dildon's books, and some extremely important bibliographical correspondence, which I've got.
But, you know, she won't know that.
That's not what she's asking.
We're assuming that she's a she.
I guess I am.
That's one of the problems.
I'm not recommending her to Ronald.
I can't say it's the... I thought you said Jackson did a pretty good Dildon's book.
Well, it was something.
It was published posthumously.
It was my guru.
Oh, very.
And it was published from his notes by Bill Bond, actually, after his death.
And it's perfectly good.
It's not.
He did not want to treat business with a high seriousness.
He liked him.
He had affection for him.
Oh, I know.
And you can't help him.
I can't help that myself.
You see, I live in Bryanson Square, and Bittman was the rector, the first rector of the church at the head of the St.
Mary's, and the gift of Lord Spencer.
And so he lent lectures from Bryanson Square.
He had the dedication to that, and several others.
Christopher Spencer's library is at the
Well, lots of it is, yeah.
The principal thing, for example, I have the dispenser catalog for the large paper.
That's yours?
Good for you.
That was kept about five months old.
The family is still in health.
And they have still some very important material there that dip into something.
Anyway, this bibliography does appear to be going through.
It's what John Wendell started.
Can you think of anything?
Sure.
I'm sorry about the sort of hard ride at the beginning of it, but I felt a little bitter about Haven because I've been always very fond of him.